// Africa.

[Politics of Africa: Fiction & Film].

In this course, we will take a look at the politics of Africa through 
the lens of fiction and film. Our discussions will focus on the 
transformative historical and political moments that have shaped the 
African continent over the course of the last two centuries. We will 
begin by reading Joseph Conrad’s Heart of Darkness, a fictional 
narrative written in the heydays of European colonialism, as a means 
to understand the profound and inescapable effects of colonization. 
We will also explore fictional accounts of Apartheid in South Africa, 
the Mau Mau Rebellion in Kenya, and the Biafran War in Nigeria, among 
others, in order to understand the close and inextricable links 
between literature and politics in Africa. The enormous impact of 
iconic political figures such as Nelson Mandela and Seretse Khama on 
fiction and film will also be considered.

[Africa is People].

What is Africa to you? How should Africa be written? How should Africa 
not be written? These fundamental questions are among other crucial 
questions informing the direction of this class, where the world’s 
second largest continent, Africa—humankind’s cradle—will be at the 
center of our discussions. We will contend with the historical 
representations of Africa, its peoples, societies and cultures, and 
what it means to imagine Africa in the contemporary moment. In doing 
so, we will not just leave at the representation of Africa as a 
geographic tragedy but as a complex space that has long teemed with 
a “human vibrancy” that enabled the peopling of the world.

[Intra-Africa Cooperation].

There has been a recent resurgence in inter-state cooperation in 
Africa on security and economic issues. These developments have 
brought a new focus to regional economic communities as well as 
continent-wide organizations like the African Union and the African 
Development Bank. This raises two important questions: (1) what 
explains the observed patterns of inter-state cooperation on security, 
trade, and investment in Africa? ; and (2) under what conditions has 
inter-state cooperation yielded results in the attempt to provide 
“African solutions to African problems?” This class will examine how 
the need to cooperate on security and economic matters is driving 
inter-state cooperation in Africa. The goal of the class is to 
systematically interrogate the logic of inter-state cooperation in 
the region, and the workings of key sub-regional and continental 
organizations. Terrorist organizations like al-Shabaab, AQIM, and 
Boko Haram, as well as ongoing civil conflict in a number of countries, 
present new challenges to African states, and have forced them to seek 
regional approaches to deal with the emerging security threats. Why do 
some African states seek international assistance in the face of 
security threats while others do not? And what is the impact of 
regional organizations on state development in Africa? At the same 
time, Africa has over a dozen regional economic communities, with 
each country being a member of at least two. Yet at 12%, intra-Africa 
trade is among the lowest of any region in the word. If Africa’s 
borders are artificial, why are they so impervious to trade? How has 
regional economic cooperation impacted intra-Africa trade and general 
mobility of goods, services, and people? The class will pay special 
attention to ongoing interstate infrastructure projects under the 
NEPAD initiative; as well as the main political and economic 
communities such as the African Union, ECOWAS, the EAC, SADC, and 
COMESA.

[Economics of Africa].

This course is not open to first year undergraduate students. 
This course is concerned with the understanding and analysis of 
African Economies. We will explore many of the issues that African 
economies are grappling with today in their progress to eliminate 
poverty and improve the livelihoods of millions. Specifically, we 
will examine questions such as, what is the structure of African 
economies, what are the key sectors and what are the challenges and 
opportunities therein? What is Africa’s role in the global economy? 
The course will be structured in three core parts: The first part is 
an overview to understand African economies, the second part covers, 
more in-depth, seven key topics that matter for the viability and the 
performance of African economies, and the third part of the course 
will take an international perspective to analyze the role of Africa 
in the world economy, discussing issues on trade and foreign aid. 
After taking this course, students are expected to have a good 
understanding of the current opportunities and challenges faced by 
African economies, to understand where Africa stands and how Africa 
contributes to the world economy, and to be able to have intelligent 
conversations on a wide range of socio-economic topics on the African 
continent. We cover material ranging from qualitative case studies to 
theories of growth and trade and to statistical analyses. No prior 
exposure to any of these fields is required—the material is designed 
to be accessible to all, and technical material is presented in a 
relatively non-technical fashion.

[The Racial Life of Waste].

Africa will constitute the backdrop for discussing the markings and 
un-markings of waste and its disproportionate effects on Africans and 
African-descended peoples in The Racial Life of Waste. In particular, 
we will focus on how the racialization of the African body at the 
“inauguration of modernity” drew both on metaphorical and literal 
readings of waste. For instance, notions like pungence, impurity, 
darkness, dirt, emptiness, etc., commonly associated with the African 
body, situated the African outside the parameters of the “Human” 
(Wynter 2003). Descriptions of Africa as “the dark continent” 
(Stanley 1878), “the heart of darkness” (Conrad, 1899), “a place 
without history” (Trevor-Roper 1963), “the Whiteman’s grave” 
(Curtin 1963), to name a few negations (Achebe 1977), created the 
conditions that racialized the African qua Black body as waste. In 
the contemporary moment, these negations, which also imagined Africa 
as an empty continent, a “terra nullius” or “terra incognita” 
(Mudimbe 1987) have spilled over into the recent interplanetary 
obsession among billionaires like Elon Musk, Jeff Bezos, Bill Gates, 
etc., to discharge “waste” into space because space is empty. If the 
African experiment is the foundation on which these extra-terrestrial 
projects on waste deposition are envisioned, we will discuss how the 
appearance of the “modern human” in the western imaginary coincided 
with the construct of “waste.” In the era of the European encounter, 
the incorporation of both the African human and the African continent 
into Western definitions of the human resulted in their equation or 
reduction to Waste. Hence, we will distinguish between “waste 
produced by humans” and “humans produced as waste,” a distinction 
that will show us that human-produced waste, otherwise known as 
“anthropogenic waste,” is not produced equally around the globe. 
For example, between 2000 to 2020, Africa, compared to the rest of 
the world, contributed only 3.9 percent of carbon emissions (Kamer 
2022), making it the least polluting continent yet the most 
vulnerable paradoxically. These are the key questions we will 
consider: What intersections between race, class, gender, and 
history are at play in the production of waste? How does Africa, in 
general, and the African body in particular, embody the paradox of 
extraction and deposition? In a world where Africa is figured as a 
geographical “shithole,” how significant are these considerations in 
the pursuit of radical global environmental justice?

[Terrorism & Insurgency in Africa].

The words “terrorism” and “insurgency” have long dominated the 
headlines about Africa. Too often, “Africa” is ascribed by the media 
and popular culture as being a violent continent where conflict is an 
inevitable outcome of primordial and ancient hatreds. But how much do 
we really know about political violence in Africa? We will 
interrogate this question by probing: Who defines “terrorism” and 
“insurgency” in Africa? Why do armed groups form and what drives 
individuals to join them? Why does political violence manifest in 
different ways? Are terrorism and insurgency effective political 
tactics? Are current forms of political violence inventions from the 
modern era, or do they have deeper historical roots? This course will 
address these and other questions, while introducing students to 
relevant analytical frameworks, theories, and cases concerning 
terrorism, insurgency, and related forms of political violence in 
Africa. The first part of the course will examine the broad 
historical trends, as well as theoretical, conceptual, and empirical 
literature surrounding terrorism and insurgency as political violence 
in Africa. We will use the tools and knowledge gained in the first 
part of the course to situate and interrogate case studies in the 
second part of the course.

[Reimagining Tech in Africa].

The course will survey the development of the Sub-Saharan African 
economies since independence. The focus will be on economic 
development, but aims to place the subject in its broader political, 
social and cultural context. The approach will be historical: 
starting with a brief review of the colonial inheritance, then 
covering the largely optimistic period to the early 1970s, moving on 
to the problems and stagnation of the 1980s, followed by the slow 
recovery of the 1990s which has accelerated in the first half of this 
decade. The survey will conclude by looking at where Africa is today 
and the prospects going forward. The course will explore key issues 
and themes that marked each period and try to piece together an 
overall story concerning where African economies have been and where 
they are going.

[Reimagining African technology markets].

Technology plays an increasingly important role in Africa’s development 
and social and economic progress. Africa’s digital revolution can be 
attributed to demand from a youthful population, increased 
digitization and digital transformation and increased investment in 
innovative products. That said, there are pervasive challenges such 
as poor critical infrastructure, a wide digital divide and skills 
gaps. While the tech sector has positioned itself to help solve 
Africa’s challenges, there is inconclusive evidence on the 
sustainability of such corporate social impact and the sector’s role 
in solving systemic challenges. As such, the class will examine the 
market systems approach to development and how to leverage the 
corporate sector for good. Africa’s fast adoption of technology for 
development provides a shift from typical “brick and motor” business 
models that focused on the construction of dated infrastructure and 
the distribution of goods, to one that leapfrogs and focuses on 
leaning in to the Fourth Industrial Revolution, a rising gig economy, 
increasing local manufacturing thus providing Africans with additional 
agency to craft their own progress. This course will introduce broad 
topics related to Africa’s development at the intersection of business, 
development and technology. Students will study factors relevant to the 
tech sector’s success such as geopolitical influences such as China’s 
digital belt road, cyber and information technology security, ethical 
considerations in product development and evolving legal frameworks. 
We will discuss the role of the private sector as a vehicle for change 
with a particular emphasis on how technological innovation is affecting 
the lives and livelihoods of Africans and African markets. The course 
will involve deep engagement with classmates, guest speakers, and 
readings and real-life focused assignments that allow students 
challenge, design and reimagine tech in Africa.

[PubPolDynamicsAfrica Env Crime].

This interactive course examines the impacts of environmental crime, 
such as illegal logging and wildlife trafficking, in Africa and the 
public and private sector response to quell this dangerous trend. 
Recognized as one of the most lucrative forms of transnational 
criminal activity, environmental crime in Africa is worth tens of 
billions dollars annually and comparable to drug and human 
trafficking in terms of profitability. This illicit trade not only 
causes severe environmental degradation, but it adversely impacts 
national security and governance throughout the continent. This 
course analyzes current bilateral and multilateral policy 
prescriptions to address environmental crime and examines private 
sectors solutions currently in place to counter illegal fishing, 
illegal logging, and illicit wildlife trafficking. A portion of the 
course will be dedicated to case studies of specific African source 
countries and their relationship with demand countries in Asia. 
Senior-level policy makers, field based conservationists, and private 
sector leaders, will join certain classes to explain how they view 
this issue set and how these principles are practically applied.

// MENA.

[Power&Society: Arabian Peninsula].

This course provides a comprehensive examination of the social, 
economic and political trajectories and dynamics of the Arabian Gulf 
monarchies (i.e., Bahrain, Kuwait, Oman, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, and the 
United Arab Emirates) and their role in shaping these states’ 
domestic, regional and international trends. It explores the 
transition of the Arabian Peninsula from the era of British imperial 
domination with local power secured by sheikhly authorities and 
tribal rules to the formation of the Gulf political entities in their 
modern forms solidified under clans and families’ rules. It provides 
an in-depth perspective on social transformations and political 
dynamics at play in Arab Gulf societies, including different forms of 
political absolutism and dissent. It critically surveys and reflects 
on important issues including tribal dynamics; gender patterns and 
family trends; youth political engagement and activism; citizenship 
and belonging; sharp social hierarchies and statelessness; labor 
migration; rapid urbanization and transformations of physical 
landscape across Gulf cities, among other issues. The course 
discusses the role of religion and competing nationalisms as both 
legitimizing variables for the Arab Gulf monarchies as well as 
elements undermining some of them, prompted by doctored domestic 
sectarianism and identity politics that facilitated sectarianization 
of domestic politics and regional geopolitical dynamics into further 
uncertainties and contingencies, mainly during and in the aftermath 
of the 2010-11 Arab popular uprisings.

[Qater,Energy,Security & Geopol].

The seminar’s goal is to offer an in-depth and novel exploration of 
how Qatar in particular, and other major energy players more 
generally, use their energy capabilities and resources as instruments 
of power that contribute to their national strategic and security 
priorities. The seminar will achieve this by offering a mix of 
lectures, discussions and presentations by a range of guest 
speakers – both scholars from academia and the policy world and 
practitioners working on energy security As the above underscores, 
this seminar is designed to provide students with an opportunity to 
consider Qatar as an international energy actor in the wider 
international system from several different perspectives. In doing so 
it will attempt to illuminate how Qatar is adapting to changing 
realities in the global energy markets and how it is using energy as 
a strategic instrument to navigate a challenging geopolitical 
landscape. This will include examining the emerging strategic 
opportunities as well as legal and national security risks in Qatar’s 
overseas energy assets and investments; Qatar’s evolving energy 
relations with a host of key regional (GCC, Turkey, Iran) and global 
(the US, Russia, China, South Korea, Japan, the UK) energy, trade and 
security partners; and how the quest for sustainability and the new 
reality created by the fourth (AI) industrial revolution are 
impacting on Qatar’s energy sector and relations with energy partners 
and competitors.

[Cultural Heritage: Arab World Arab Studies].

This course will engage with issues around cultural heritage 
(architecture, monuments, art, poetry, dance, natural environment, 
etc.), the impact of conflict on cultural heritage, and the role of 
governments, NGOs, and diplomatic missions in promoting and 
protecting cultural heritage. We will address definitions of cultural 
heritage, how cultural heritage figures into state and civil society 
agendas, the roles of tourism and museums, changing environments and 
climate change, the lives and positions of those who produce or live 
among cultural heritage, how the role of systemic racism and 
injustice at the national and international level threaten cultural 
heritage, indigenous peoples, and artists and artisans, how conflict 
and war impact cultural heritage, and the role of national and 
international laws in illegal circuits of arts and cultural heritage 
(the same circuits trafficked by arms, drugs, people). Students 
taking the course will develop an understanding of the issues 
around cultural heritage in the Middle East and North Africa, the 
circulation of objects, cultural products, and ideas, 
postcoloniality, global power structures, and indigenous and 
environmental activism, among others.

[Intro to Study of Arab World Studies].

This course provides a critical introduction to the main paradigms, 
methods, and approaches that have been used to study the Arab world. 
From Oriental Studies, modernization theory, and area studies to the 
disciplinary social sciences, we explore how specific social, 
historical, and political contexts affect knowledge production in 
and on the Arab Middle East and North Africa.

[Israel and World Politics].

This course will focus on Israel’s foreign policy and diplomacy from 
1948 until the present. We will discuss the main characteristics of 
its foreign policy, the tension between ideology and "realpolitik" 
and the decision making process. We will analyze Israel's relations 
with the United States, the European Union, Russia, the Arab states, 
Iran, Turkey, Africa, and the Vatican. Key documents of Israel's 
diplomatic history will be analyzed. The course will include a 
discussion of “diplomatic language”, the functions of Israeli 
embassies and consulates, diplomatic ranking and protocol, public 
diplomacy and diplomatic immunity. The course will include several 
diplomats as guest speakers as well as a visit to the Israeli Embassy. 
We will also view and discuss documentary films. This course will be 
taught by Ambassador(Ret) Zion Evrony, who most recently served as 
the Israeli Ambassador to the Holy See (2012-2016). Ambassador Evrony 
will share his experiences as a former Israeli diplomat for over 43 
years.

[Oil & Politics of the Gulf Arab Studies].

The Arab Gulf states are currently undergoing profound political and 
economic transformations at the domestic, regional, and global levels. 
During their state formation process in the 20th century, these states 
went from dependence on one natural resource, pearls, to another, 
fossil fuels. Home to over half of the world’s oil reserves, the Arab 
Gulf states have a distinct political environment. On the domestic 
front, the high dependence on hydrocarbon wealth coupled with the 
growing youthful demographic shifts has caused a dilemma in which 
these states endeavor to implement ambitious economic reform 
initiatives while attempting to maintain their political status quo. 
Several factors have contributed to the Arab Gulf states ascension in 
regional and international politics. The Arab Spring uprisings of 
2011 and their aftermath presented the Arab Gulf states with a host 
of political and economic challenges and opportunities. Multiple 
divisions and armed conflicts, both within the Persian Gulf and the 
surrounding region, have increased because of the changing political 
order. The Gulf states have taken the lead in regional politics and 
conflicts due to their vast wealth and stability relative to the 
broader Middle East region. Political Islam affects many of these 
conflicts and remains a formidable force to either curry favor or 
foment rivalries across the region. Additionally, the Gulf states 
have used their foreign aid to shape regional politics in favor of 
their interests. On an international scale, the critical juncture of 
high oil prices during the 2008 financial crisis allowed the Gulf 
Cooperation Council (GCC) states to take advantage of international 
investment opportunities in Western nations in the throes of 
recession. They used their economic leverage to amplify their 
influence and parlayed it into increased political power. Course 
Objectives: The course will analyze the dynamics of these 
increasingly important states within the context of four themes: 
1) state formation and institutional legacies 2) the domestic 
political landscapes attending to the politics of monarchies, 
parliaments, and various political blocks 3) regional politics with 
emphasis on conflict, aid, political Islam and hegemony 4) the 
ascension of the GCC states on the international scene and their 
relations with major powers. It will explore how these dynamics 
unravel for each Gulf state with attention to the varying histories, 
sociopolitical contexts, economic interests, different external 
shocks, and their strategic choices.

[China-MENA Relations].

China is an increasingly influential actor across the Middle East and 
North Africa (MENA) region. This course examines the pillars of 
Sino-MENA engagement and explores the economic, political, and 
sociocultural implications of growing Chinese involvement in the 
region. Students must consider these implications across various 
levels: government-to-government, firm-to-firm, and people-to-people. 
The course pairs thematic classes with relevant country case studies 
in modules consisting of two classes, enabling students to situate 
key themes and theoretical concepts within specific geographic and 
institutional contexts. The first class of each module introduces a 
theme or topic, while the second class incorporates a relevant country 
case study. In their associated assignments, students are encouraged 
to delve deeper into how a particular theme applies to the designated 
country case study or examine how a given topic/issue has unfolded in 
another Middle Eastern country of their preference. As part of the 
review section at the end of the course, students will be required to 
submit a longer comparative analysis that incorporates two or more 
country case studies.

[Palestinian Politics].

This seminar focuses on internal Palestinian politics – from the 
emergence of the modern Palestinian national movement in the years 
following the Nakba, through the trials and tribulations of the PLO 
in the 1970s and 80s, up to the present-day schism between Fatah and 
Hamas. A central focus of the course will be on the interplay between 
internal Palestinian politics and the peace process—how the Oslo 
process impacted the effectiveness of Palestinian political leaders 
and institutions and how the decisions by and constraints on 
Palestinian political actors, in turn, affected prospects for a 
diplomatic resolution.

[Evoln UN Role Isr-Pal Conflict].

From Resolution to Management and Prevention: The Evolution of the 
UN’s roles in the Israeli Palestinian Conflict. What can the UN’s engagements in the Middle 
East teach us about the Organization’s effectiveness? Upon completion 
of his term as UN Secretary-General in 2006, the late Kofi Annan told 
the Security Council that the region has “shaped the Organization 
like no other.” Indeed, despite the many wars and deep political 
changes that have occurred in the Middle East since the UN’s founding, 
it is the ongoing conflict between Israelis and Palestinians and its 
lack of resolution that continues to cast the longest shadow. 
Although the UN has not been at the center of every effort to resolve 
this most intractable of conflicts, its engagement in favor of 
partitioning Palestine into two states, one Arab and one Jewish, and 
intervention in the aftermath of every major Arab Israeli war, have 
all solidified its presence on the ground and enmeshed it in the 
region’s tragic politics in unprecedented ways. This course will 
examine the different phases of UN engagement in the Arab Israeli 
conflict, up to the present. It will focus on the role of member 
states, the institutional bodies of the UN, and that of successive 
Secretaries-General and their envoys, in the various efforts to 
manage, resolve and prevent violent conflict. The course will also 
analyze the prerogatives of the actors on the ground, the Israelis, 
the Palestinians, regional stakeholders, and their interplay with the 
UN’s political, development, humanitarian and human rights mechanisms 
in relation to the conflict. Finally, the course will look at the 
future of the UN’s engagement on the ground in the context of the 
overall goal of the UN, to maintain international peace and security.

[Untangle ME Relig/Polit/Ethinic].

This course will approach the Middle East quagmire by way of a 
historical discussion that centers on the problem of conflicting and 
confusing definitions and aspirations, both for those within the 
region and for those outside trying to understand what is operative 
within. The starting point will be theological, but the endpoint will 
be the interweaving of religion with other issues, such as politics, 
ethnicity, nationalism and economics. The goal is less to presume to 
solve the problem than to have a clearer understanding of why it is 
so difficult to solve.

[ReExmn Isr-Pal Crisis: Lit/Film].

This course will examine how Israeli and Palestinian literatures 
depict the “other” through text and image, from the early years of 
Zionism to the twenty-first-century. Using the methodologies of 
comparative studies, we will attempt to understand how each nation’s 
views evolved and changed over time, with a focus on works which 
shifted these perceptions in revolutionary ways. Various depictions 
of the “other” will be examined, such as the criminal, noble hero, 
sexual predator, the lover, the suicide bomber and the ally. We will 
also discuss how both art forms grappled with the many issues which 
together contribute to the conflict between Palestinians and Israelis, 
including: identity, language, class and the deceptively simple task 
of defining homeland. Weekly critical readings will include the 
theoretical ideas of Orientalism and post-colonialism, enabling 
students to understand both literatures within the wider context of 
world literature. Among the authors covered are: Yosef Chaim Brenner, 
S. Yizhar, Sami Michael, A.B. Yehoshua, Eli Amir, Amos Oz, David 
Grossman, Hanna Ibrahim, Emile Habibi, Atallah Mansour, Ghassan 
Kanafani, Mahmoud Darwish, Samir El-Youssef and Sayed Kashua. All 
readings, literary and critical, will be read in English translation, 
and five films will be screened as part of the course.

[Education in MENA: Knowldg&Pol].

This course explores the interplay of knowledge and power in the 
constitution of educational institutions and policies in the Middle 
East and North Africa (MENA), as well as in defining appropriate and 
desirable forms of knowing, teaching and learning. In the course, we 
will examine a number of key questions related to education in MENA, 
namely: -How are educational institutions and “legitimate” forms of 
knowledge shaped by religious, economic, cultural and political 
forces? -How did colonization and other Western interventions shape 
education in MENA and what are its enduring effects? -How has the 
expansion of state-funded public schooling contributed to the 
processes of state formation and power consolidation in the region? 
What have been the unintended effects of these processes? -What are 
the primary debates, tensions and challenges related to educational 
developments in the region today? -How have global educational 
policies, assessments and measures come to shape educational policy 
in the region?

[Comp Politics of Middle East].

This course is intended to introduce students to the politics of the 
Middle East by exploring some of the main political and social 
problems facing the region today. The topics covered emerge from 
academic, policy, and everyday debates about real-world questions 
and challenges that have affected and continue to affect the lives of 
people in the Middle East. We will debate these questions ourselves, 
and scrutinize how they have been studied and analyzed by scholars 
who work on the region. We will also dwell on more fundamental 
questions of how research agendas emerge, which questions end up 
being studied and why, and the relationship between area studies 
knowledge and general theories of comparative politics. Each week we 
will read four important works that each in their own way seek to 
make sense of a set of puzzles or questions related to that week’s 
topic. These works include a mix of ‘classic’ texts in the field of 
Middle East comparative politics and newer research on the same 
questions. We will also, where possible, integrate other types of 
media, like memoirs, novels, and films. The focus of the course is on 
the 20th and 21st centuries, though occasionally we may discuss more 
historical periods. The course is structured as a survey and, as such, 
we will be aiming to cover a broad range of topics, including state 
formation, authoritarianism, oil and rentierism, political Islam, 
conflict, sectarianism, and the Arab Spring revolutions. The topics 
we will cover are certainly not exhaustive, but they are selected to 
capture some of the most significant debates and questions that have 
motivated research on the region. Students will have the opportunity 
in their final assignments to delve more deeply into one of these 
topics, or to explore one that we haven’t covered in the course.

[Media in the Middle East].

This course examines the various ways in which media, culture and 
politics intersect in the contemporary Arab Middle East. It is 
designed to assist students in understanding the role of the evolving 
Arab mediascape in shaping the socio-political information 
environment of a fast changing region. Students will be exposed to 
and engage in discussions about various media theories, issues, 
forms and practices. A broad range of topics will be covered 
including the history and development of the Arab press, the rise of 
satellite television, the political economy of Arab media, the 
mission of Arab journalism, the Al Jazeera phenomenon, and the advent 
of new and alternative media. Special attention will be paid to the 
role social media and satellite television has played in the 
momentous changes which shook the region during the Arab Spring. 
Equally of interest is the uneven role of media in the Arab world’s 
transformation process, particularly the disjunction between the 
liberating potential of transnational and new media which teem with 
censor-free content, on the one hand, and the authoritarian 
political culture of the region, on the other hand. We will also 
dwell on the relationship between media and state security and 
reflect the contribution of political communication to the emergence 
of an Arab public sphere, the consolidation of a transnational 
identity, and the reconfiguration of citizenship. We will consider 
the extent to which both news and entertainment media create new 
communicative spaces for social action and engender contestatory 
politics. Equally relevant are the ways in which locally-produced 
media in the Arab world respond and adapt to globalization.

[Post 1979 Pakstn,Afghan,Iran].

No single year in modern history has had more significant impact on 
the Muslim world than 1979. Pakistan, Afghanistan and Iran were at 
the epicenter of the year’s history making events whose consequences 
continue to live among us all. These included the Islamic revolution 
in Iran in February 1979 and the start of three decades and a half of 
Iran US tensions, and the execution of an elected Prime Minister by a 
military dictator in Pakistan setting up the long army rule and 
process of Islamization. Then came the US hostages crisis in Tehran 
in November and the burning of the US Embassy in Islamabad, signaling 
the merger of Pakistani and Iranian anti Americanism that began 
feeding a broader sentiment against the US in the Muslim world. The 
year ended however with its most consequential event: the Soviet 
invasion of Afghanistan in December 1979.The US-led jihad against the 
Soviets, assisted by Pakistan, won but ended up as a bittersweet 
victory as it laid the foundation of a deadly extremist religious 
infrastructure that started beating to the rhythm of global Islamic 
revivalism unleashing uncontrollable forces of radicalism. They had a 
horrendous impact on the region and on the US and global security, 
the most tragic and visible sign of which was 9/11.The course will 
look at all these dramatic and history changing developments and 
their complex intertwining with local, regional and global issues 
and challenges. It will examine how Pakistan’s national vision, 
embraced by years of authoritarian rule and troubled democracy, rise 
of religious orthodoxy, and strategic over extension by its ambitious 
army led to a weak institutional architecture that collided with its 
domestic tensions, opening up Pakistan to long years of instability 
and extremism, which only are beginning to be brought under control. 
The democracy is beginning to stabilize and Pakistan’s on going 
efforts against extremist and militant organizations are proceeding 
slowly but steadily. How will Prime Minister Imran Khan handle these 
challenges?The course will study the attempts by Iran to export its 
revolution, the development of its nuclear program, the challenges 
Iran posed to the US power in the Middle East and its allies, and 
the looming strategic shadow of Iran over the region, especially 
following the forces of instability released by the unsuccessful Iraq 
war. And the course will also look at nearly four decades of strained 
relations between Iran and the US.The course will study the just 
finished war in Afghanistan and the ongoing fight against Al Qaeda, 
the newly arrived terrorist outfit in Afghanistan-Pakistan border 
region—the ISIS-K and its interplay with the Taliban and what role 
can be played in these conflicts by Pakistan which itself has been a 
target of terrorism emanating from Afghanistan.It will also look at 
how Afghanistan has endured one of the most devastating conflicts of 
our time, while simultaneously struggling with the building of 
“political institutions, structures of governance, (and) vital state 
institutions” and what may lie in store for this country after the 
return to power of the Taliban who are facing daunting task of 
addressing the economic free fall of Afghanistan and its security and 
stabilization challenges after the US withdrawal . Also how will the 
Biden administration will cope with the Afghanistan challenge. Another 
relevant question that the class will analyze includes what roles 
could Pakistan and the US could play in the stabilization of 
Afghanistan following the end of America’s war there?And finally with 
the lengthening strategic shadow of China over the region it will be 
interesting to see what role China may play in the future of 
Afghanistan. Also interesting to watch will be India’s role and that 
of Iran in this strategic power play likened by some to the ancient 
Great Game.The Iran nuclear deal has been abrogated by Washington and 
sanctions re imposed on Iran. It will be interesting to see whether 
the Biden administration returns to the deal and on what terms 
specially after the election of a hard line President. What would be 
the prospects of thaw if the nuclear deal is revived —what it would 
mean for their bilateral relations and emergence of possible new 
strategic alignments in the region. The course may thus also be 
relevant to an extent for those interested in the Middle Eastern 
studies.

[Turkish Foreign Policy].

Turkey has always been renowned for occupying a strategic position 
and having a foothold in one of the most sensitive regions of the 
world. For many years, Turkish diplomats were keen to point out 
that Turkey was located in an “unfriendly neighborhood”. During the 
Cold War, Turkey was a front-line state, situated on the edge of the 
USSR and was perceived to be an indispensable actor against the 
spread of communism and has been the only Muslim member of NATO since 
it became a member in 1952. Furthermore, Turkey is the only Muslim 
country which has begun full accession negotiations with the European 
Union and the possibly the only country which has strived for over 
half a century to consolidate liberal democratic norms. The country 
and its people pride themselves in the fact that they have never 
been ruled by a foreign country and the modern republic’s predecessor, 
the Ottoman Empire was a land-based imperial power. In today’s world, 
interest in Turkey and Turkish foreign policy is growing exponentially, 
particularly following the so-called Arab Spring, where Turkey is 
being portrayed as a ‘model’ for regional Muslim countries to emulate. 
Over the last two decades, Turkey has grown economically, as well as 
become increasingly politically stable (in terms of government 
longevity). As Turkey’s national and per capita incomes have risen, 
so too has the country’s economic interests, both regionally and 
globally. This has prompted several questions: to what extent is 
Turkey becoming the regional power and to what extent is Turkey 
likely to move beyond its traditional western foreign policy 
commitments in pursuit of its diversifying economic and strategic 
goals? The course is designed to focus on providing students a clear 
understanding of the determinants that go into the making of Turkish 
foreign policy in republican times (1923-present). A general survey 
of Turkish foreign policy will be completed in the first half of the 
semester. This will give students both a chronological and historical 
understanding of the development of international politics surrounding 
Turkey. This is followed by a regional analysis of foreign policy 
goals and developments in the contemporary period, in aid of 
answering the questions posed above.

[Sporst, Pols & Society in ME].

In this “Politics of Sports” class we will read and discuss chapters 
from “Sport, politics, and society in the Middle East” which is 
edited by Danyel Reiche and Tamir Sorek. We will learn about 
different aspects of the study of sport, including: which actors and 
institutions in sport politics matter, how the process of sport 
policy-making works in different countries, how sport is used as a 
foreign and domestic political tool, which ideologies drive sport 
policy-making, and why mega-sporting events have become a 
much-discussed topic in regional and global affairs. In addition to 
our discussions on the textbook, Professor Reiche will give 
presentations about research he has conducted on the politics of 
sport. These will include a review of elite sport policies around the 
world, issues of sport and nationality such as sporting federations’ 
eligibility criteria to represent a country in international sport, 
the sporting boycott of Israel by some Middle Eastern countries such 
as Lebanon and Iran, and Qatar’s motives behind hosting the soccer 
World Cup 2022.

[Electoral Systems in MENA].

The purpose of this course is to analyze with the theoretical and 
methodological framework of comparative perspective the different 
types and electoral systems in Middle East and North African 
countries–from Morocco to Afghanistan, including the Arabian 
Peninsula, Iran, Turkey and Pakistan– and the most relevant electoral 
processes that have taken place in the region in the last two 
decades, from the Gulf War (1992) until the ‘Arab spring’ (2011). 
The course will focus on the changes in the political systems and 
regimes, and on the implementation of new electoral rules and 
elective chambers, as well as their influence in the electoral 
results and the consequences in the party and political systems. The 
course will also discussed the influence of external –US, UN, UE, 
international and regional media– and internal factors –local media, 
political associations, women participation– in shaping those 
changes, as well as the role of the international organizations 
dedicated to electoral assistance. The comparative politics approach 
will be useful to understand why all MENA region started a rapid wave 
of change toward a democratization process in a short period of time 
started with the ‘Arab Spring’ of 2011, and why this did not happened 
before.

[Warfare in the Middle East].

This class will help students understand the role that warfare and 
military operations have played in the development of the modern 
Middle East, and in the region’s international relations today. It 
will cover the military campaigns of many of the most important 
Middle Eastern conflicts with a particular emphasis on how the course 
and outcomes of those conflicts shaped future military actions and 
defined the power relationships of the region today. It will examine 
both conventional wars and insurgencies to highlight the differences 
in goals and results, and why insurgency has become more commonplace 
throughout the region. These classes will dwell on the lessons 
learned by each side as a result of each conflict, and how each 
attempted to adapt its armed forces and/or strategy to better fight 
the next war. In this way, each class will help the student develop 
an understanding of the evolution of warfare in the Middle East since 
1945, both in terms of war fighting and the use of military 
operations as a tool of statecraft. The course also employs the 
history of recent campaigns as a foundation for an examination of 
modern Middle Eastern states and their ability to generate military 
power, wage wars, and employ military operations to advance their 
political and security agendas. The course considers in considerable 
depth how the politics, economics and culture of Arab society affect 
the military development, combat operations and effectiveness of Arab 
armed forces. It examines the range of societal factors that both 
empower and impinge upon Israeli military power, as well as the 
development of the modern Iranian armed forces as a function of the 
Islamic Republic’s peculiar political, diplomatic, economic and 
social circumstances.

// South and Latin America.

[BRA, Development & Complexity].

This course is structured to support and promote a rigorous and 
pluralistic understanding of Brazil in its domestic and international 
multiple dimensions. Although Brazil shares some of its neighbors’ 
characteristics, the history, economy, social structure, and 
political dynamics of the only Portuguese speaking country in the 
Western Hemisphere recommend an approach taking into consideration 
its specificities Based on an interdisciplinary perspective, the 
course will work with different levels of abstraction. We’ll review 
and update critically the different theoretical approaches to 
Development, including the ones within the framework of the new 
paradigm of Complexity Theory and, concomitantly, we will articulate 
that analysis with concrete elements of Brazil’s long term historical 
trajectory in order to give intelligibility to processes that cannot 
be reduced to chronological sequences.

[Pol of Hum Rights: LA in Compar].

This advanced seminar will focus on the politics of human rights and 
challenges to effective protection of human rights. In order to gain 
some depth in relation to the issues that could be addressed, the 
seminar will delve into only four themes or types of human rights 
violations: enforced disappearance; deprivation of liberty (and 
inhuman treatment and torture); executions (right to life); and 
violence against women. Selected Latin American countries will be 
used to explore these themes, including Argentina, Colombia and 
México. The primary regional focus of the course will be on Latin 
America; however, the seminar will use material arising out of other 
contexts, such as Indonesia and the United States of America. 
Cross-regional and comparative analysis is also encouraged in 
discussions and research. Course reading draws on relevant 
literatures in political science, social sciences and law, including 
textbooks, academic articles, legal decisions, and international 
treaties and other legal instruments. Legal training is not required. 
Readings also include in-depth reporting and exposés on major human 
rights events in Latin American countries. Complementarily, we will 
view films (fiction and documentary) that offer a vivid perspective 
of the problems being analyzed. Throughout the course we will 
consider the practical dimensions of human rights activism, and the 
legal and policy implications of the subjects studied. Debates will 
concentrate on dilemmas that arise out of human rights practice, 
focusing on the fissure between standard-setting exercises and 
national implementation, and the growing gap between rhetoric and 
practice. We will review the role of the state in relation to 
development of international human rights law and reflect on the way 
the state has managed to fade as the object of concern of this 
(once state-centered) branch of international law.

[Latin Amern Govt and Politics].

This course offers an introduction to the contemporary politics of 
Latin America. The introductory section of the course considers 
historical dynamics and the foundation they laid for subsequent 
political and economic development in the region. We briefly examine 
the region’s colonial history, its wars of independence, and the 
struggle to construct nations and the emergence of industrialization 
in the 19th century. We also explore democratic development and the 
interventionist economic strategies that Latin American governments 
pursued through much of the 20th century, considering theories that 
seek to account for Latin American underdevelopment, the breakdown 
of democracy in the 1960s/1970s, and transitions from authoritarian 
rule in the 1980s. The rest of the course focuses on crucial 
contemporary questions. We consider democracy’s problems and 
pathologies; the various ways in which (and success with which) 
market reform has proceeded across the region; poverty, inequality, 
and informality; and the rule of law. We will also examine 
integration among Latin American countries, as well as the role the 
United States has played in the region. The final weeks of the 
course comprise case studies of a handful of Latin American nations.

[Culture & Power in Lat Amer].

Culture and Power in Latin America Latin American artists, 
intellectuals and activists, such as José Martí, Octavio Paz, 
Gabriela Mistral and Pablo Neruda, among many others, developed 
distinct theoretical frameworks with which they would understand and 
negotiate the region’s special geographic, political, economic, 
linguistic, and cultural conditions. In this course we consider 
these frameworks that reflect and engage significant debates 
regarding culture and power since the late nineteenth century 
through the present day. We examine a range of linguistic and visual 
forms, including narrative, poetry, documentary film, visual art, 
and performance, that emphasize innovative aesthetic techniques as a 
way to engage political and cultural hegemonies. To supplement our 
readings, we dialogue over Skype or in person with contemporary 
artists and activists as well as attend representations of Latin 
American and Latino culture in Washington, DC.

[Political Econ of Lat Amer].

The course focuses on several aspects of Latin America’s economic 
and political development. We will examine the different economic 
and political challenges facing the region and the different policy 
approaches developed to address them. The course combines insights 
from economics, political science and history to present different 
explanations associated with how politics influence economic policy 
and development and vice versa. Finally, we discuss the potential 
role of public policy to prevent or resolve these concerns. Key 
questions we will address are: How political factors influence the 
presence of economic crises in the region? Has the presence of an 
orderly, peaceful, and steady democratic rule improved economic 
performance in the region? Why is LA one of the most violent regions 
in the world and with higher levels of perceived corruption? Is the 
economic gap between the United States and Latin America driven by 
its different colonial experiences? Is the presence of abundant 
natural resources a “curse” for long-term development? Why did 
import substitution industrialization fail in LA while it succeeded 
in other countries? What should we expect of the political and 
economic development of the region in the future? The course also 
seeks to familiarize students with the most common empirical 
methodologies utilized in the field. As such, some lectures will 
include an overview of the relevant statistical technique needed for 
fully understanding the findings and assessing the credibility of 
key papers.

[Drug Trafficking: The Americas].

To provide students with a historical, comparative and contemporary 
examination of the evolution of drug trafficking in Latin America 
and several important drug control policies to combat this trade. 
The course takes a multi-disciplinary, historical and comparative 
country and regional approach in focusing on Bolivia, Peru, Ecuador, 
Colombia, Mexico, Paraguay, Brazil and the regions of Central 
America and the Caribbean. The course will provide students with an 
understanding of the evolution of drug trafficking strategies, 
related agro-industry organization, smuggling routes, money 
laundering practices, illicit markets and the mix of criminal 
organizations. It will also enable the students to examine the 
interplay of the illegal drug industry (cocaine, heroin and marijuana) 
along with related public policy (such as illicit crop eradication, 
extradition, interdiction, alternative development, counterinsurgency 
and other law enforcement and security measures) with globalization, 
social movements, guerrilla and paramilitary organizations, arms 
trafficking, migration, indigenous and popular Latin American 
culture, national and geo-politics, corruption, democracy, and 
socio-economic development.

[China Russia Polit in Americas].

This pioneering seminar examines the comprehensive political, 
economic and security relations of extra-regional powers with Latin 
America and the Caribbean since 1945, particularly the first two 
decades of the 21st century. Most Latin American countries have 
willingly sought to diversify their foreign relations, and therefore, 
have sought to strengthen relations with several extra-regional 
powers. Since the Monroe Doctrine, the Western Hemisphere has been 
a sensitive area for the United States, and Washington has always 
been concerned with the presence of extra-regional powers in the 
region. The 2017 U.S. National Security Strategy employs sharp 
language against China and Russia and calls for regional relations 
that “will limit opportunities for adversaries to operate from areas 
of close proximity to us,” and that “limits the malign influences of 
non-hemispheric forces.” In this course, we will examine thoroughly 
the immense effects of China’s engagement with the region; we will 
study the USSR and the Cold War in Latin America, as well as 
Russia’s recent return to the region under Putin. Additionally, we 
will analyze some historical and new links, such as the ones with 
EU countries, the Vatican, Japan, India, Israel and Iran, all the 
while using the comparative method.

[States& Societies: Lat Amer].

This course will analyze the major political trends and issues that 
have shaped Latin American governments and politics throughout the 
course of the twentieth century as well as the key issues confronting 
the region as it begins the 21st century. The study of Latin America 
has been a rich source of theory for political scientists, 
contributing to a general understanding of development issues, 
regime change, military rule and democratic transition, among other 
themes. As such, given the developments of the last decades (the 
return of military leaders to their barracks which ended in some 
cases decades of authoritarian rule, the great difficulties that 
practically all nations in the region have had in consolidating 
democratic governance, the rise of new social movements, the rise of 
a new left, exacerbated social and security tensions caused by drug 
trafficking and organized crime, and finally the persistence in some 
countries of old forms of armed violence) the theoretical models 
drawn from Latin America have also been applied to other nations in 
other regions experiencing comparable changes, in Eastern Europe and 
in parts of Asia and Africa. This course will examine several of 
these broad trends of politics in the region, focusing on the actors 
and processes which have shaped institutions, policies, parties, 
movements and political events in contemporary Latin America, The 
second half of the course will examine recent changes in politics, 
principally those relating to new social movements, identity, gender 
and ethnicity, drug-trafficking, political parties, and newer 
post-cold war conflicts. We will draw on some of the best social 
science literature, together with videos and films that elucidate 
contemporary political themes. The aim of this course is to promote 
a more comprehensive understanding and familiarity with the social 
science literature and approaches that have been used to study a 
key and vital region in international politics and the emerging 
global economy and polity.

[States & Societies: Lat Amer Latin American].

This course will analyze the major political trends and issues that 
have shaped Latin American governments and politics throughout the 
course of the twentieth century as well as the key issues confronting 
the region as it begins the 21st century. The study of Latin America 
has been a rich source of theory for political scientists, 
contributing to a general understanding of development issues, regime 
change, military rule and democratic transition, among other themes. 
As such, given the developments of the last decades (the return of 
military leaders to their barracks which ended in some cases decades 
of authoritarian rule, the great difficulties that practically all 
nations in the region have had in consolidating democratic governance, 
the rise of new social movements, the rise of a new left, exacerbated 
social and security tensions caused by drug trafficking and organized 
crime, and finally the persistence in some countries of old forms of 
armed violence) the theoretical models drawn from Latin America have 
also been applied to other nations in other regions experiencing 
comparable changes, in Eastern Europe and in parts of Asia and Africa. 
This course will examine several of these broad trends of politics in 
the region, focusing on the actors and processes which have shaped 
institutions, policies, parties, movements and political events in 
contemporary Latin America, The second half of the course will 
examine recent changes in politics, principally those relating to 
new social movements, identity, gender and ethnicity, drug-trafficking, 
political parties, and newer post-cold war conflicts. We will draw on 
some of the best social science literature, together with videos and 
films that elucidate contemporary political themes. The aim of this 
course is to promote a more comprehensive understanding and 
familiarity with the social science literature and approaches that 
have been used to study a key and vital region in international 
politics and the emerging global economy and polity.

// Asia.

[ChineseAppr:Sci, State, Strat].

Engaging China cannot be limited to a singular perspective. The 
complexity of interactions between the United States and China for 
over more than 100 years requires a more in depth analysis. With 
this course, students explore American as well as Chinese perspectives 
on the governance of China, religious freedom, human rights and 
differing strategies of political and military engagement. As a 
starting point for exploring the different principles of Western and 
traditional Chinese approaches, the course highlights scientific 
principles of Western and Traditional Chinese Medicine. This offers 
insights into different approaches to public healthcare, managing 
well-being and the treatment of illnesses. This course is designed 
for students who look for an opportunity to develop nuanced 
comparative insights into Chinese American relations, in order to 
maximize access and understanding of different and fascinating 
systems of organizing society, science and international relations.

[Sovereign Risk and Asia].

Sovereign risk is the risk that a national government will default 
on its debt obligations. For most of the post-World War II era, 
sovereign risk was mainly a concern facing creditors to emerging 
market governments. However, in the wake of the global financial 
crisis in 2008, in some advanced countries government debt has grown 
to levels only previously seen in wartime while the ongoing Covid 
pandemic is pushing sovereign debt even higher to historical levels, 
a trend that has undermined the creditworthiness of governments 
formerly judged to be of the lowest risk. This course takes the 
position that deficits and debt matter, although students are welcome 
to challenge that view. It will provide a multifaceted view of 
sovereign risk, primarily through the lens of credit rating agency 
methodologies. It will examine the interplay of economic, 
institutional, fiscal, financial market and geopolitical factors that 
influence sovereign credit quality. It will focus on sovereign case 
studies and examine common features of debt crises—namely, the 1980s 
Latin America debt crisis which engulfed the Philippines, the 1997 
Asian Financial Crisis and the effect of the 2008 Global Financial 
Crisis on Asian sovereigns. While the focus is on Asia, the course 
will examine the watershed Greek default and debt crisis of 2009-2018 
and a contentious triple-A downgrade of the U.S. government in 2011. 
The course will also examine the recent rise of China as a major 
creditor to developing countries as well as the fiscal and economic 
effects of the Covid pandemic on the creditworthiness of advanced and 
developing countries. The final project for the course will be 
in-class oral presentations in the format of a mock sovereign credit 
rating committee. At the conclusion of the course, students will: 
(1) develop an understanding of the evolution of sovereign risk since 
the 1980s and rise of global bond markets, (2) be conversant on the 
interplay of factors influencing sovereign credit risk (3) be capable 
of taking a substantive opinion of relative sovereign credit quality. 
Grading consists of weekly, short writing assignments and the final 
project; class participation will be a key factor. This semester, the 
course will feature one guest lecturer, the head of Moody’s Investors 
Service Macro-Board and former director of their sovereign default 
analysis work. The instructor will draw on his experience gained over 
three decades, including as the Asia-Pacific and Middle East regional 
manager for Moody’s Investors Service in Singapore and as an emerging 
market economist at the Institute of International Finance in 
Washington, DC. He is currently the president and CEO of The Korea 
Society in New York City and he also teaches at Columbia University’s 
graduate School of International and Public Affairs.

[Trade, Trust & Development: SAsia].

As the world’s economic center of gravity increasingly pivots to 
Asia, and as South Asia gradually enhances its role in the world 
economy, an economic understanding of the region becomes increasingly 
more important. This is a course about the evolution of South Asian 
countries, home to around 1.9 billion people, their contrasting 
development stories and paradigms, the economic and human 
interlinkages between them, and the vast untapped potential of 
those interlinkages. It is about the significant foregone 
development opportunities arising from insufficient regional 
engagement, that affect most countries in South Asia, including the 
three largest countries. As a region, most of South Asia was a part 
of successive empires, making cultural and economic interaction 
between countries a very natural phenomenon. After the Partition of 
1947, and successive events thereafter, the region has contrived to 
create barriers to deeper engagement. This is not a course about 
India alone, nor about India-Pakistan. It is about South Asia.

[Asia's Nationalism].

Nationalism has become a widely used concept in political science, 
and yet there is no consensus on its definition. For some, it 
reflects simply a frame for human identity, a notional nation to 
call home. For others, nationalism represents the mobilization of 
individuals around the cause of the nation, and can have a far 
bolder intention. In today’s global politics, nationalism is often 
seen as a reaction to, and hindrance of a globalizing world. In some 
instances, nationalism is seen as globalism’s antidote, while in 
other instances it reflects a desire to repel or resist the 
transformative impact of a world increasingly intruding into 
national communities. In Asia, this concept has had many 
incarnations. Largely associated with the arrival of Western 
imperialism, the nation-state seemed an imposter in Asia especially 
to those who had been educated in the West but who sought to give 
voice to their culture’s identity. From the early decades of the 
twentieth century, Asia’s leaders – its scholars, its politicians 
and its military commanders – have deliberated on this concept of 
the nation and of their nation’s identity in the world. Nationalism 
in the early twenty-first century Asia seems to be organized around 
the conflict that redrew the boundaries of Asian societies, and the 
balance of power that it fostered in its wake. History, and its 
reimagining, provides ample fodder for Asia’s contemporary 
nationalist impulses. This course will explore the various episodes 
and advocates of nationalism in Asia. Beginning with some of the 
early reactions on this modern concept of the nation and whether it 
suited their own societies, we will explore the evolution and 
reframing of nationalism across Asia.

[Encountering Asia: Pol/Eco/Soc].

Asia will be a part of your life. The region's economic growth has 
never been more deeply felt across the globe, while its strategic 
importance and political influence impact the international system 
profoundly. Home to almost half of the world's population, source of 
much of the world's consumer goods, and place where some of the 
world's most ancient and enduring civilizations emerged, Asia is an 
indispensible topic of investigation for all students of 
international affairs. This course provides an introduction to 
Modern Asia. Attention will be paid to how the history, politics, 
and economics of this vast region impact policy challenges for the 
U.S. and Asia today. No prior knowledge of Asia will be assumed, and 
students can come from any academic field. While politics is 
important to understanding Asia, the course will draw insights from 
many other fields, including philosophy, social and political 
sciences, pop culture, health, science and education. The instructor, 
an award-winning author, former White House official, and cable news 
analyst, will employ classic and contemporary readings, multimedia, 
music, and guest speakers to create an interactive classroom 
experience.

[US-SE Asian Rel: Post 9/11 Wrld].

This seminar course will examine the relationship between the United 
States and Southeast Asia in the aftermath of the September 11, 2001 
terrorist bombings. These bombings led the United States to pay more 
attention to Southeast Asia due to the links between several 
militant Islamic groups in the region and the Al Qaeda network. 
Since 2013, the terrorist threat has increased with the rise of the 
Islamic State (IS), which remains a threat even though it has lost 
much territory. The course will cover U.S. relations on the political, 
economic, and socio-cultural levels with the eleven countries of 
Southeast Asia: Brunei, Burma (Myanmar), Cambodia, East Timor, 
Indonesia, Laos Malaysia, the Philippines, Singapore, Thailand, and 
Vietnam. The United States is especially concerned about Indonesia, 
the largest Muslim nation in the world.

[Japan's Search for Strategy].

This course will examine the search for security, prosperity and 
identity in modern Japan. The course opens with an introduction to 
the enduring elements of Japan’s Strategic Culture. In the second 
session the course introduces the Yoshida Doctrine of anti-communism, 
pro-business economic policies, alignment with the United States and 
passive security policy that guided Japan’s international 
orientation throughout the Cold War. The next three classes explore 
the post-Cold War transformation of Japan’s domestic political 
economy as well as legacy issues from the “1955 System” and the 
Second World War that have shaped the strategic debate. The second 
half of the class then turns outward to explore the dynamics of 
Japan’s contemporary relations with the United States and the other 
powers in Asia. The final class returns to the question of Japan’s 
strategy drawing on these case studies.

// Russia and Eastern Europe.

[Russian Military Power].

The Russian military has recently re-emerged on the global stage as 
an influential and formidable force that has challenged the existing 
world order and enabled a more muscular Russian foreign policy. This 
course explores a broad and inclusive study of the modern Russian 
military, drawing insights from military history, theory, doctrine, 
and politics. The course is advanced, but has no prerequisites and 
assumes no prior knowledge of Russian studies. The organization of 
the course is principally thematic, and will engage a discursive 
approach to draw out the political, economic, social, and 
technological developments of the current Russian military, with 
forays into the earlier Soviet era. First, we will consider Russia’s 
military past and how history shaped Russia’s military doctrine and 
thinking. Second, we will review patterns in Russian strategic 
thinking and recent efforts to update and reform Russian military 
doctrine for the 21st century. Third, we will review Russia’s recent 
operational experiences to contemplate Russia’s capability to adapt 
and refine its doctrine for modern combat. In addition to the weekly 
readings listed below, I encourage you to read broadly on the topics 
of discussion, including drawing upon political and analytical 
commentary, contemporary literature, recent cinema, and other 
primary texts to investigate a multifaceted view of the military in 
the Soviet and contemporary Russian experience. The course has two 
essential goals: (1) to present a basic introduction to the modern 
Russian military; and (2) to use the study of the Russian military 
as a means for honing skills in political analysis.

[The Future of Russia].

With Russia’s next presidential election only four years away, 
Russia is approaching what is likely to be a major turning point, 
both in its internal politics and its external relations. After 
twenty-four years under one leader, Vladimir Putin, where will Russia 
go from there? Will “Putinism” survive after Putin’s departure? In 
Moscow, the guessing game has begun, with signs that it is already 
destabilizing Russian politics. This will not be an ordinary political 
succession, because the very context of Russia’s future is about to 
change. The era of global climate change has begun, and it is on its 
way to becoming the defining issue of our century. And of all the 
countries that stand to be affected by climate change, Russia is at 
the top of the list. Russia is one of the most dependent on the 
export of hydrocarbons. One-third of its territory lies north of the 
Arctic Circle, and its Arctic coastline stretches for 24,000 
kilometers, much of it consisting of permafrost. Its forests, 
vulnerable to disease, drought, and fire, are the world’s largest, 
and account for over half of Russian territory and one-fifth of the 
world’s forested area. And as the world’s fourth-largest emitter of 
CO2 and many harmful pollutants, Russia is both one of the chief 
causes and victims of global warming. The rapidly-evolving battle 
against fossil energy affects Russia particularly. Russia has the 
world’s largest reserves of oil and gas, but the combination of 
renewable energy, technological advances, and tighter climate 
regulation will bring a peak in global oil consumption, perhaps as 
early as 2040, followed by a steady decline, together with lower 
prices This in turn will cause a fall in income from oil exports, 
which currently account for nearly half of the Russian government’s 
revenues. Income from natural gas, though it will grow strongly for 
the rest of the century, will not be sufficient to fill the gap. 
This will cause Russian economic growth to slow, and government 
budgets to decline. Regional inequalities will increase, as the 
eastern two-thirds of Russia lose ground compared to the westernmost 
third. How does Russia perceive the issue of climate change, and how 
is it reacting? Do policy-makers perceive the oncoming threats, and 
what are they doing about them? How will various sectors of the 
economy be affected? What role will Russia play in the evolving 
international politics of climate change? Will Russia’s status as a 
great power still endure by mid-century? In short, what will be the 
future of Russia in the era of climate change? That is the subject 
of this seminar.

[Russian Hybrid Warfare].

The cyberattack against Estonia in 2007, the invasion of Georgia in 
2008, the annexation of Crimea in 2014. Bots, trolls, and information 
operations. Manipulation, influence, and deniability. “Illegals,” 
“patriotic hackers,” and “little green men. Oligarchs, compatriots, 
and useful idiots. Since the US election in 2016, there has been 
increased visibility of the Kremlin’s new way of war and how it 
targets our societies and citizens. This course will cover the 
Russian doctrine and ideology that lays the groundwork for the 
Kremlin’s global imperialist insurgency; discuss examples and case 
studies of these tactics and operations, as well as their history; 
and explore why it is so challenging for the United States and its 
allies to combat full-spectrum/hybrid warfare. Course materials will 
leverage first-hand accounts of those on the front lines of 
identifying and countering the Kremlin’s shadow warfare.

[The Putin Generation].

Vladimir Putin was elected to the Russian Presidency in March, 2000. 
He could remain in office until 2036, at which point he would be 84 
years old. Over the past quarter century a new generation of 
Russians has grown up knowing no leader other than Putin. This 
course seeks to understand how these young Russians, sometimes 
called the "Putin Generation," see their lives, their country's 
leadership, and Russia's - as well as their own - role in the world. 
In some ways, this generation is very different from their parents 
and grandparents, in other ways they are surprisingly similar. Their 
behavior, their likes, dislikes and political views are being 
examined by Russian social scientists. Our course materials include 
those studies, along with results of public opinion polling and the 
voices of those young Russians, expressed in social media, music and 
art, as well as support and protest against Vladimir Putin. During 
the semester, on Skype, we will discuss issues directly with young 
Russians. This course will be conducted as a seminar, with two 
required papers on any aspect of what SFS students have learned in 
class or in their individual research. Knowledge of Russian is 
helpful but not required.

[Looking for Trouble in Cn Asia].

This course will focus on Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan, 
Turkmenistan, and Uzbekistan. These countries are mostly seen as the 
undifferentiated and static “post-Soviet ‘stans,” as the object of a 
“Great Game” between global and regional powers, or for what they 
mean to conflicts outside the region, like Afghanistan and the 
Middle East. In this course we will dive into what drives conflict 
inside the region itself and try to understand great power 
competition and collaboration from the perspective of the Central 
Asian countries. Along the way we will get to know the recent 
history of the different countries individually as well, and 
students will learn how to keep up on and analyze events in the 
region. We will start with how the trauma of perestroika and the 
collapse of the USSR shaped the new countries of the region. We will 
examine the revival of Islam in the region and how Central Asians 
became involved with the Islamic state; the rise of nativist ethnic 
nationalism; economic dependence on labor migration; resource 
conflict and climate change and the complicated borders in the 
region. We will also look at how great power competition and 
geopolitical develops in China, Afghanistan, and Ukraine have 
challenged the security of the region.

// Oceania and Islands.

[Understanding Modern Caribbean].

When it comes to the Caribbean as a region, international relations 
scholarship and policy discussions are often perceived through the 
lens of great power competition and the geo-political issues of the 
north, and ignore or minimize the agency and impact of small island 
developing states (SIDS) like those found in the Caribbean. Is there 
a need to alter conceptual and or theoretical frames to better 
understand the region? The Caribbean has often played an outsized 
and generally underappreciated role in world affairs as well as in 
U.S. domestic and foreign policy. The Caribbean region is an 
exceedingly diverse area in its cultural, socio-political, 
developmental, diplomatic, environmental, and geo-strategic profiles. 
Indeed, there is a spectacular quantum to discover intellectually 
from this region that is simultaneously an old and a new civilization. 
Also, due to an accumulation and a burst of creative and 
sustainability activities, there are innumerable opportunities to 
synthesize new knowledge for the use of decision-makers in policy 
formulation and programme development. This course will concern 
itself with both – the intellectual discovery of the region as well 
as an opportunity to develop and share new hypotheses and knowledge 
for a Caribbean civilization that is thriving in the 21st century. 
The broad themes of the course will be predicated on (1), identity 
and independence; (2), politics and geo-political dynamics; (3), 
diplomacy; (4), development models and sustainable development; (5), 
climate change, biodiversity, and the environment; (6), youth, 
ICT/digitalization, and the future coming toward the region.

[ThePacific:Past, Present, Future].

This course is aimed at establishing literacy in the Pacific Islands, 
their storied histories and their complex presents. It will take 
students through the Indigenous human geographies in the Pacific, 
the coming of Europeans and the establishment of spheres of 
influence through various economies and imperial activities. It will 
pay close attention to the causes and consequences of power shifts, 
the imposition of imperial powers and resistance to it as well as 
the movement of Asian people into the island Pacific as indentured 
plantation laborers from the mid-C19th. It will investigate the 
building of tensions that led to World War Two and what happened in 
its aftermath. From here the course looks at the reasons the Pacific 
Islands have returned to western focus as the frontline of climate 
change and more urgently still, driven by massive and recent Chinese 
attention as an extension of its Belt and Road Initiative. As well 
as paying close attention to perspectives from Washington, Canberra, 
Wellington, Paris and Beijing, this course will be Pacific focused, 
giving much attention to Pacific island actors, voices and perspectives, 
and framed around the urgent situation of the present.

[Geostrategic Comp in Pacific].

Competition for strategic influence in Oceania is becoming as 
crowded and complex as it was in the 19th and 20th centuries. While 
the United States, Australia, New Zealand, and France remain the 
dominant regional powers, China has poured in aid and investment 
dollars in recent years—and Russia, Indonesia, Japan, and India also 
increasingly seek to advance their interests among Pacific Island 
countries (PICs). The rivalry produces “strategic anxiety” even as 
it empowers PICs with greater choice of partners to help them meet 
pressing demographic, economic, environmental, and regional security 
concerns. Through a mixture of readings, guest lectures, and seminar 
discussions, this course explores the drivers behind international 
security politics in the Pacific from both extra- and intra-regional 
perspectives, including assessments of the extent to which traditional 
concepts, legacy agreements, and historical relationships remain 
useful for both PICs and external powers.

[Nobody's Backyard: Grenada].

In a theoretical gazing from the north, global affairs discussions 
and scholarship often focus on great power competition and ignore 
the agency and impacts of small states. Caribbean small island 
developing states in particular have played an outsized and often 
underappreciated role in world affairs as well as in U.S. domestic 
and foreign policy. Using a south-north conceptual view, this class 
will use the opportunity of the upcoming 50th anniversary of Grenada’s 
independence, the 45th anniversary of the Grenada Revolution and the 
40th anniversary of the U.S. invasion to engage with the roles, 
impacts and challenges of Grenada as a post-emancipation, 
post-colonial, small island developing state. The course will 1), 
provide a brief overview of the Caribbean in global affairs; 2), 
within that context, explore major distinguishing national themes 
and policy directions in Grenada’s nearly fifty years of 
nation-building, 3) take a special look at its history and enduring 
impacts inside and outside of Grenada, including independence, 
revolution and invasion as well as sports and popular culture; and 
4), consider the broader context of small island developing states 
and some small states in the world order. Learning will take place 
through lectures, readings, discussion, special guests and a project 
designed to advance student-specific interests. Classwork for INAF 
324 will be enhanced by an associated 1 credit course that will 
travel to Grenada over spring break to conduct on-the-ground student 
research and to look more closely at the people, policies, places 
and socio-cultural happenings relevant to the course.

[Australian-American Alliance].

This course examines the history, evolution and contemporary 
challenges in the Australian-American relationship. In broad terms, 
both Australia and the U.S. share a language, many cultural forms 
and traits, and a deep commitment to democratic ideals. Today, both 
share many common interests and challenges. Both have deep interests 
in Asia, which today drive their deep strategic relationship embodied 
in the ANZUS Treaty. This course focuses on the evolution of the 
Australian-American relationship from shared cultural and political 
ideals through to the evolution of the strategic alliance formed in 
the aftermath of World War II and deepened in the ensuing years.

// Europe.

[The European Economy].

Over the last two centuries, European economic integration has 
proceeded in spurts, with periods of enhanced integration followed 
by stagnation or even reversal. The post-World War II period in 
Europe stands out against this history as a sustained effort at 
improving economic integration in multiple dimensions. In this course, 
we will explore various components of this process, in three modules. 
We begin with a look at economic history and stylized facts; explore 
various aspects of European economic integration on the level of the 
EU and conclude by looking at issues addressed on the level of the 
individual member states, notably social systems and labor markets.

[The Vatican&Nazi War Criminals].

When the archives from the pontificate of Venerable Pope Pius XII 
(1939-1958) opened in March 2020, additional documentation for a 
long-debated aspect of World War II, Holocaust and postwar history 
became available: documentation related to Axis and Nazi war 
criminals who escaped from Europe postwar. Many fled to Latin 
America, but also to other continents, some with the help of 
Catholic priests and prelates. New studies and documents bring to 
light more detail about the so-called “ratline,” and address how 
much the Vatican Secretariat of State knew or did not know about 
such activity. In this course, students will read newly published 
primary source documents, as well as testimonies and films, 
describing the process of escape.

[Holocaust: Gender&Racial Ideol].

Holocaust: Examination of Gender and Nazi Racial Ideology. This 
course examines how Nazi racial ideology dictated people’s lives 
before and during the Holocaust. It will introduce students to 
various themes in the overlapping areas of gender in modern European 
history, history of the Third Reich and World War II with the main 
emphasis on the Holocaust. The class will discuss how gender and 
various racial groups became a focus of Nazi politics. Nazi 
persecution was not limited only to Jews who were deemed racially 
inferior. Their policy of annihilation, which also included people 
with disabilities, was aimed at excluding hereditarily “unfit” 
Germans from the nation. The ideological justification supported by 
scientists and medical staff escalated toward mass extermination of 
Germans with disabilities who along with Jews and Roma were counted 
among Nazi “biological enemies.” This course will explore the daily 
lives of men, women and children in Nazi Germany and occupied Europe, 
both from the perspective of victims, perpetrators and onlookers. 
The class will discuss to what extent pre-World War II gender roles 
helped victims not only develop important survival skills, but also 
affected the decisions of ordinary men and women to become killers. 
Using primary, secondary sources and film, we will analyze the 
experiences of men, women, and children during the Holocaust both 
from the perspective of victims and perpetrators. The different 
source materials will be historically contextualized to strengthen 
and expand the understanding of how Nazi policies affected both men 
and women, while examining how racial theory and the concept of a 
“master race” contributed to the suffering of Jews and other victims 
before and during World War II. This class does not require any 
background in Jewish, Holocaust or Gender studies.

